ELASTIC PROPERTIES OF SOIL
Hooke's generalized stress-strain law is commonly used in solving geotechnical problems
of stress and settlement. In equation form Hooke's stress-strain law for any homogeneous,
isotropic, elastic material is
ey = —(a-y- fxax - IA(T1) (2-64)
ez = —{az - IX(Jx - IX(Jy)
The signs here are based on using (+) \x of Eq. (b) following.
In matrix notation Eq. (2-64) can be written as
€ = Da (2-64<i)
where the matrix D is the following
D
The shear modulus G' (which may be subscripted) is defined as the ratio of shear stress ss
to shear strain es.25 It is related to Es and /x as
Poisson's ratio /x is used in both pressure and settlement studies and is defined as the ratio
of axial compression ev to lateral expansion ei strains, or
M = ^ (W
The /x ratio has a (+) sign in this equation if ev is compressive strain and the lateral strain
€L causes the lateral dimension to increase. In a tension test the sign is (+) if the sample ev
produces elongation while the lateral dimension(s) decrease. The shearing strain es is de-
fined as the change in right angle of any corner of an element in compression as illustrated in
25The shear modulus in structural mechanics literature often uses the symbol G,-, where i may be s = steel; c =
concrete; etc. Since Gs is used in geotechnical work for the specific gravity of the soil solids, the closest symbol to
the "literature" is G'.(b) Poisson's ratio, \i [(+) as shown]. (c) Modulus of subgrade reaction.
Figure 2-43 Elastic properties of soil.
Fig. 2-43fo such that
es = angle BCD - angle B1CD' (c)
Another concept occasionally used is the volumetric strain, e^ defined using initial mass
volume V and volumetric change A V as
AVev = — = ei +e2 + 63 (d)
The subscripts x, y, and z may be substituted for 1, 2, and 3 in this equation.
In confined compression tests (such as the consolidation test described in Sec. 2-10 or
for the compression beneath the tip of a pile in situ) the lateral strain (62, €3) is taken as
0.0. Making these substitutions in Eqs. (2-64) and solving for 61 = ev, one can obtain the
following:
_ (1 + IJi)(I - 2/X)CJ1 1 - 2/1 0-1
Es(l - fi) 2(1 - fi) G' K6)
Since this textbook uses the z axis as the vertical axis, you may use az for a\ in this equation.
Of interest is that for /JL = 0.5, this equation gives the volumetric strain ev = 0.0; i.e., there
is no volume change in the soil. Also, for /x = 0 the volumetric strain is ev = ajEs = ez.
The volumetric strain was used to plot e versus log p of Fig. 2-\6b.Deformation, SPressure, a
(a) Stress-strain modulus.Strain, € Strain, eDeviator stress, Aa
Aa
1 unit1 unit
Use: Initial tangent
or
initial secant lineNoncyclic testCyclic test
Note increase in E5EnvelopeInitial tangent modulus
Secant modulusDepends on
andTABLE 2-7
Values or value ranges for Poisson's ratio /i
Type of soil fx
Clay, saturated 0.4-0.5
Clay, unsaturated 0.1-0.3
Sandy clay 0.2-0.3
Silt 0.3-0.35
Sand, gravelly sand - 0.1-1.00
commonly used 0.3-0.4
Rock 0.1-0.4 (depends somewhat on
type of rock)
Loess 0.1-0.3
Ice 0.36
Concrete 0.15
Steel 0.33
Another material property concept is the bulk modulus Et,, which is defined as the ratio of
hydrostatic stress to the volumetric strain ev and is given as
_ 2 , l + /x _ Es
Eb ~ 3° T^ " 3(1-2M) a)
For an elastic material the shear modulus G' cannot be (-), so Eq. (a) sets the lower limit of
/JL > -1. Equation if) sets the upper limit at /JL < 0.5. It appears that the range of /i for soils
(that are not "elastic") is from about -0.1 to 1.00. Table 2-7 gives a range of values for select
materials. It is very common to use the following values for soils:
ft Soil type
0.4-0.5 Most clay soils
0.45-0.50 Saturated clay soils
0.3-0.4 Cohesionless—medium and dense
0.2-0.35 Cohesionless—loose to medium
Although it is common to use /JL = 0.5 for saturated clay soils, the reader should be aware
that this represents a condition of no volume change under the applied stress az. Over time,
however, volume change does occur as the pore fluid drains. Equation (e) defines the Poisson's
ratio that develops initially (ev = 0) and also later when ev > 0. Since the strain is produced
from stress and Fig. 1-1 indicates a vertical variation, it necessarily follows that /JL is stress-
dependent from Eq. (e).
A special case in geotechnical work is that of plane strain. This arises where strains occur
parallel to two of the coordinate axes (say the x and z) but the strain is zero perpendicular
to the x-z plane (along the y axis). If we set ey = 0 in the set of equations for Hooke's law
[(Eqs. (2-64)] and solve for the resulting values of E5 and /JL, we obtain the following:
(2-65)If we take /JL = 0.5 and solve for the plane strain value /i',we have
^ l-/x (1-0.5)
which is greater than the "elastic" value of 0.5. The plane strain /JL' should be used in plane
strain problems—and with E's if applicable.
The modulus of sub grade reaction (also subgrade modulus or subgrade reaction) is de-
fined as (see Fig. 2-43c)
ks = £ (2-66)
where Aa is the increment of contact pressure and AS is the corresponding change in set-
tlement or deformation. These data can be obtained from a plate (or footing) load test and a
plot drawn as Fig. 2-43c. The 5 versus a plot is generally not linear, and one must obtain ks
as the slope of either a tangent or secant line. Either a tangent (solid line) or secant (dashed)
line slope of Fig. 2-43c can be used for ks. Usually, initial values (through the origin) are
used; however, one can choose any tangent point or an averaged value using the two points
cut by a secant line along the curve. The secant slope defined by the origin (S = 0) and at
S = 0.0254 m (25 mm or 1 in.) giving AS = 0.0254 m is recommended as an initial selection
for Eq. (2-66).
The stress-strain modulus E8, Poisson's ratio /A, and the modulus of subgrade reaction ks
are the elastic properties of most interest. These values are commonly used in computing
estimates of foundation settlements. The shear modulus G' is commonly used in vibration
problems of Chap. 20 to estimate foundation frequency and displacement amplitudes.
The stress-strain modulus can be obtained from the slope (tangent or secant) of stress-
strain curves from triaxial tests (see Figs. 2-43a and 2-32). It is often estimated from field
tests that are described in Chap. 3 (see also Table 5-6). Typical value ranges for several soils
are given in Table 2-8. It can be seen that Es for soils is only Mo to Moo that of steel and
concrete.
For the CD or CU triaxial test with a cell pressure of a3 and a deviator stress Ao-I =
0"i ~ 0"3 (the pressure applied at various load stages during the test) we may rewrite one of
Eq. (2-64), sayez = 61, as
€1 = ^r(Ao-! -2/JLa3) (g)
Jb8
It is usual to plot €1 (computed directly as Ao-\/L) versus Ao"i as shown in Fig. 2-43a. From
this plot we should be able to solve Eq. (g) above for both E8 and /JL by taking several pairs
of points along the curve such that the curve slope is approximately constant in the interval
between point pairs. If we do this, we find that /JL > 0.5 at very small strains and that both
E8 and /JL are stress-dependent. Of course, we could directly inspect Fig. 2-43a and readily
observe that if the curve is not linear, then the stress-strain modulus E8 is not linear. This result
again gives reason to term the curve "slope" the stress-strain modulus, and not the modulus
of elasticity.
Equation (g) also gives clear reason why unconfined compression tests with 0-3=0 give
larger strains (and smaller E8) than confined compression tests. Since the soil is "confined"TABLE 2-8
Value range* for the static stress-strain
modulus E5 for selected soils (see also
Table 5-6)
Field values depend on stress history, water
content, density, and age of deposit
Soil Es, MPa
Clay
Very soft 2-15
Soft 5-25
Medium 15-50
Hard 50-100
Sandy 25-250
Glacial till
Loose 10-150
Dense 150-720
Very dense 500-1440
Loess 15-60
Sand
Silty 5-20
Loose 10-25
Dense 50-81
Sand and gravel
Loose 50-150
Dense 100-200
Shale 150-5000
Silt 2-20
* Value range is too large to use an "average" value for design.
in situ, it is reasonable for confined compression tests to produce better "elastic" parameters.
Although it is difficult to compare laboratory and field E5 values, there is some evidence that
field values are often four to five times larger than laboratory values from the unconfined
compression test. For this reason, current practice tends to try to obtain "field" values from in
situ testing whenever possible. This topic will be taken up in more detail in the next chapter.
Table 2-8 gives a range of Es values that might be obtained. Note that the range is very
large, owing to the foregoing factors as well as those factors given on the table. With this
wide range of values the reader should not try to use "averaged" values from this table for
design.
If laboratory test plots similar to Fig. 2-43a are used, it is most common to use the initial
tangent modulus to compute the stress-strain modulus Es for the following reasons:
1. Soil is elastic only near the origin.
2. There is less divergence between all plots in this region.
3. The largest values are obtained—often three to five times larger than a tangent or secant
modulus from another point along the curve.In spite of these several shortcomings for Es the value along the curve is commonly used
in finite-element analyses based on the computed stress level. This computation may require
that the problem be iterated several times until the computed stress level matches the stress
level that was used on the previous cycle to obtain Es.
A number of investigators [Leonards (1968), Soderman et al. (1968), Makhlouf and Stew-
art (1965), Larew and Leonards (1962)] have suggested that a better initial tangent modulus
for settlement analyses might be obtained by cycling the deviator stress Acri to about half
the estimated failure stress several times [Leonards (1968) suggests at least five cycles] and
then compressing the sample to failure in the CU triaxial test. The initial tangent modulus
(may be called Er) by this method may be three to five times larger than Es obtained on the
first cycle (see Fig. 2-43a). The increase in stiffness depends on the initial soil state and on
sample disturbance. This stress-strain modulus is a static value.
Cyclic tests using low-amplitude strains and frequencies (or stress reversals) in the range
of g to 10 Hz are used to obtain dynamic values of Es and G'. The dynamic values (considered
in more detail in Chap. 20) may be from two to ten times the static value.
Both Es and Poisson's ratio /JL are heavily dependent on the following:
1. Method of laboratory test (confined, unconfined, undrained, drained).
2. Degree of confinement. Es increases from a minimum value in the unconfined compression
test to very large values depending on cell pressure ac.
3. Overconsolidation ratio OCR—usually increases with OCR.
4. Soil density—Es usually increases with depth in situ because the density usually increases
(in the same stratum).
5. Water content—lower water contents tend to higher Es. Brittle fractures at low strains
occur at low water contents.
6. Strain rate (e/time)—Es is lower by a factor of 2 or more compared with values obtained
at high strain rates [see Richardson and Whitman (1963)]. Field strain rates are usually,
but not always, lower than in the laboratory.
7. Sample disturbance—usually reduces Es from in situ value.
These several factors mean that considerable judgment is required to obtain a reasonably
reliable value for design use.
The stress-strain curve for all soils is nonlinear except in a very narrow region near the
origin. Kondner (1963) proposed that the stress-strain curve (Fig. 2-AAa) could be represented
by a hyperbolic equation of the form
e
0*1 - (73 = —T-
a + be
which could be rewritten with ACJJ = cr\ - a3 in linear form as
-^- = a + be (2-67)
Note the similarity of Eq. (2-67) to Eq. (2-47). The left side of Eq. (2-67) can be computed for
various values of deviator stress and the corresponding strain to make a linear plot as shown
in Fig. 2-AAb. Extension of the plot across the discontinuity at e —> 0 gives the coefficientFigure 2-44 (a) Usual stress-strain plot—hyperbolic-curve approximation; (b) transformed representation of
stress-strain—gives approximate linear curve as shown. [After Kondner (1963).].
a, and the slope is b. Although Kondner proposed this procedure for clay soils, it should be
applicable for all soils with similar stress-strain curves [see Duncan and Chang (1970)]. The
form of Eq. (2-67) rearranged and shown on Fig. 2-AAb has particular value in finite-element
method (FEM) analyses since it is much easier to program an equation to compute Es based
on current output e than to make a search along a stress-strain curve (using a number of values
of e versus Acn input as an array). Computation time is greatly reduced when a large number
of elements are in the FEM model.
The following empirical correlations may be used to estimate Es for cohesive soils:
Normally consolidated sensitive clay:
Es = (200 to 500) X su (2-68)
Normally consolidated insensitive and lightly overconsolidated clay:
Es = (750 to 1200) X su (2-69)
Heavily overconsolidated clay
Es = (1500 to 2000) X su (2-70)
Several equations will be presented in the next chapter, based on in situ testing, that may also
be used for both cohesive and cohesionless soils to compute Es.
